title: "Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment Mountain Portal: a powerful new online tool developed by Map of Life for exploring mountain biodiversity"
date: 2016-12-11
permalink: /press/2016/12/11/gmba-mountain-portal
byline: Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment


The Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment (GMBA) teamed up with Map of Life (MOL) to launch a new web-portal for the 
visualization and exploration of biodiversity data for over 1000 mountain ranges defined worldwide.

Mountains are hotspots of biodiversity and areas of high endemism that support one third of terrestrial species and 
numerous ecosystem services. Mountain ecosystems are therefore of prime importance not only for biodiversity, but for 
human well-being in general. Because of their geodiversity, mountain ecosystems have served as refuge for organisms 
during past climatic changes and are predicted to fulfill this role also under forthcoming changes. Yet, mountains are 
responding to increasing land use pressure and changes in climatic conditions, and collecting, consolidating, and 
standardizing biodiversity data in mountain regions is therefore important for improving our current understanding of 
biodiversity patterns and predicting future trends.

In order to accurately predict potential changes in mountain biodiversity in response to drivers of global changes and 
develop sustainable management and conservation strategies, we must be able to define what exactly a mountain is, 
where mountains are in the world, and what species currently occur in those mountains.

More than 1000 mountain ranges around the world have now been described in a new study published in Alpine Botany by 
Christian Körner et al. (2016). Additionally, and for  the first time, this global mountain inventory coverage has 
also been combined with expert range maps for approximately 60,000 species across different organismic groups and is 
being made available online through the Mountain Portal. The Mountain Portal is an interactive web platform provided 
by the Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment of Future Earth and developed by Map of Life. With just a few clicks 
users can explore and download growing lists of mountain ranges and expected species. Downloaded data can then be used 
for a multitude of projects ranging from mechanistic studies on the evolution and ecological drivers of mountain 
biodiversity to the development of indicators in sustainability research. 

The mountain portal is an open source tool for all types of users, ranging from laymen and citizen scientists to 
researchers, practitioners, stakeholders and policy makers. It is an evolving resource that will utilize the power of 
the global community to improve mountain biodiversity and inventory information.

[View article on Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment](http://www.gmba.unibe.ch/about_us/news_archive/2016___12___11/)
